content/posts/0007-patch-vs-put.mdx, before:

---
isPublished: true
title: "PUT vs. PATCH: It Is About Time To Learn the Difference"
date: 2024-08-14
excerpt: "Learn when to use PUT and PATCH in application design"
keywords:
  - REST
  - API
  - HTTP
authors:
  - name: Florian
    description: Founder
    avatar: /authors/florian.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/florianmartens9
---
Understanding the difference between PUT and PATCH can help you design better applications. 

## Full Resource Replacement With PUT

[PUT requests](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616#page-55) replace the entire resource with 
the provided data. PUT requests require sending the complete representation of the resource. PUT is idempotent, 
meaning multiple identical requests result in the same resource state.

```bash
PUT /users/123
Content-Type: application/json
{
  "firstName": "Pablo",
  "lastName": "Picasso"
}
```

Example response:

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "id": 123,
  "firstName": "Pablo",
  "lastName": "Picasso"
}
```

PUT request may fail for a number of reasons. These include missing or invalid data (HTTP 400), server errors (HTTP 500),
missing resources (HTTP 404) and more.

No matter if you send one PUT request or many. It should always yield the same result (unless you get rate limited) and resource state.
This concept is called idempotency.

## Practical Applications of PATCH

In the wild, we often see PATCH requests to update a subset of resource fields. Let's take our example from above. To 
update the `firstName` of our user we send the following request:

```bash
PATCH /users/123

{
  "firstName": "Pablo",
}
```
Note that we are including the fields that we want to change not the full user record.

This is a correct usage of PATCH but does not paint the full picture.

## Diving Deeper Into PATCH

Although it is common to see PATCH requests in web applications it is important to note that the PATCH HTTP method is not part of the 
[HTTP RFC 2616](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616). Instead, it is a proposed standard tracked in 
[RFC 5789](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5789).

> The PATCH method requests that a set of changes described in the request entity be applied to the resource identified by the Request-URI. The set of changes is represented in a format called a "patch document" identified by a media type.

This definition gives us flexibility in describing the changes we want to apply to a record. We are not restricted 
to the fields of our record (like `firstName` or `lastName`). Instead, we can author any set of instructions meant to change the state of our record.

**A simple example:** Let's imagine our API manages a set of counters. We send requests to increment a counter.

Let's send a couple requests.

```bash
PATCH /counters/123
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "increment": 1
}
```

Response

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

{
  "count": 1,
}
```

Another request

```bash
PATCH /counters/123
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "increment": 1
}
```

Response

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

{
  "count": 2,
}
```

There are **two** things to note about this example:

-  PATCH requests CAN be idempotent but do not have to be. Here, sending the same request many times will generate a different response on every request.
In contrast, partially updating our `firstName` from our user record (s. above) was performed idempotently.
- PATCH requests CAN describe the properties of the record they are changing (e.g. `firstName`). They can also be comprised of instructions
 on how to change a record (e.g. `increment: 1`).

## Conclusion
PUT is used for complete replacements and ensures idempotency. PATCH requests allow partial updates and can be non-idempotent depending on the operations applied.
Furthermore, PATCH requests can contain any set of instructions to modify a resource. This set of instructions can be defined by you. This can be as simple as 
a single field of a resource or as complicated as a [file diff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diff).

Understanding these methods' behaviors and appropriate use cases will lead to more effective and efficient API design.

Commit message:

Add text about real world put

content/posts/0007-patch-vs-put.mdx, after:

---
isPublished: true
title: "PUT vs. PATCH: It Is About Time To Learn the Difference"
date: 2024-08-14
excerpt: "Learn when to use PUT and PATCH in application design"
keywords:
  - REST
  - API
  - HTTP
authors:
  - name: Florian
    description: Founder
    avatar: /authors/florian.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/florianmartens9
---
Understanding the difference between PUT and PATCH can help you design better applications. 

## Full Resource Replacement With PUT

[PUT requests](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616#page-55) replace the entire resource with 
the provided data. PUT requests require sending the complete representation of the resource. PUT is idempotent, 
meaning multiple identical requests result in the same resource state.

```bash
PUT /users/123
Content-Type: application/json
{
  "firstName": "Pablo",
  "lastName": "Picasso"
}
```

Example response:

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "id": 123,
  "firstName": "Pablo",
  "lastName": "Picasso"
}
```

PUT request may fail for a number of reasons. These include missing or invalid data (HTTP 400), server errors (HTTP 500),
missing resources (HTTP 404) and more.

No matter if you send one PUT request or many. It should always yield the same result (unless you get rate limited) and resource state.
This concept is called idempotency.

### PUT Requests ... Meet The Real World

While this definition sounds easy enough there are nuances. For example, you may have noticed that the request body of our PUT request did not contain the
user `id`. Instead, the `id` was part of the URL.

Full resource replacement? I don't think so!

```bash
PUT /users/123
Content-Type: application/json
{
  # Where is the id?
  "firstName": "Pablo",
  "lastName": "Picasso"
}
```

User records may contain any number of immutable fields like `createdAt`, `updatedAt`. These fields are not meant to be updated. Our user record may also contain fields
for internal use that we don't expose at all like `hashedPassword` or `hasReceivedXMarketingEmails`. Are PUT requests valid
if we omit these fields?

While die-hard believers in the [HTTP RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616#page-55) can make the case that these are invalid PUT requests,
I'm advocating for a practical approach (feel free to make your own choices).

Use PUT requests when you accept a full list of your resources mutable fields.

## Practical Applications of PATCH

In the wild, we often see PATCH requests to update a subset of resource fields. Let's take our example from above. To 
update the `firstName` of our user we send the following request:

```bash
PATCH /users/123

{
  "firstName": "Pablo",
}
```
Note that we are including the fields that we want to change not the full user record.

This is a correct usage of PATCH but does not paint the full picture.

## Diving Deeper Into PATCH

Although it is common to see PATCH requests in web applications it is important to note that the PATCH HTTP method is not part of the 
[HTTP RFC 2616](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616). Instead, it is a proposed standard tracked in 
[RFC 5789](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5789).

> The PATCH method requests that a set of changes described in the request entity be applied to the resource identified by the Request-URI. The set of changes is represented in a format called a "patch document" identified by a media type.

This definition gives us flexibility in describing the changes we want to apply to a record. We are not restricted 
to the fields of our record (like `firstName` or `lastName`). Instead, we can author any set of instructions meant to change the state of our record.

**A simple example:** Let's imagine our API manages a set of counters. We send requests to increment a counter.

Let's send a couple requests.

```bash
PATCH /counters/123
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "increment": 1
}
```

Response

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

{
  "count": 1,
}
```

Another request

```bash
PATCH /counters/123
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "increment": 1
}
```

Response

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

{
  "count": 2,
}
```

There are **two** things to note about this example:

-  PATCH requests CAN be idempotent but do not have to be. Here, sending the same request many times will generate a different response on every request.
In contrast, partially updating our `firstName` from our user record (s. above) was performed idempotently.
- PATCH requests CAN describe the properties of the record they are changing (e.g. `firstName`). They can also be comprised of instructions
 on how to change a record (e.g. `increment: 1`).

## Conclusion
PUT is used for complete replacements and ensures idempotency. PATCH requests allow partial updates and can be non-idempotent depending on the operations applied.
Furthermore, PATCH requests can contain any set of instructions to modify a resource. This set of instructions can be defined by you. This can be as simple as 
a single field of a resource or as complicated as a [file diff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diff).

Understanding these methods' behaviors and appropriate use cases will lead to more effective and efficient API design.
